
---

Today, I feel deeply in how good education is important. During learning new words, I search them one by one in an online dictionary, then read them follow the IPA on the webpage. Some words in explanation or examples have a hyper link which can open a page of that word. Some words which I familiar with and may have learned in middle school, I realized I read them incorrect from the beginning! I started to learn English at middle school, before that, I cannot even know a, b, c. I lived in a accient town, my teacher were almost the native. They came back to hometown after they graduated and being a teacher of us. They are not good at that time. It's old day, it was lucky when you had a English teacher. Since all my classmates were not read the word correct, we don't know we were wrong. And when I went to the high school or college, the English teachers were not very care about the pronunciation of an individural. So, if we were wrong, we almost had no chance to make it right at most of time. I'm not good at English, even then, I pass the CET-4. I just wonder if I learn English in right way at the beginning, I may do better now. When you look back, you may think how could these thing happen, I have been leaving school for fifteen years. Luckily, I keep learning something after leave school, so it's not very hard to make things right now. I just reflect this when I got a strong feeling.
Today, I'm <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">profoundly realizing</span> the importance of good education. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">As</span> I learn new words, I <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">look</span> each one <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">up</span> in an online dictionary, then practice <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">reading</span> them <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">following</span> the IPA transcription on the webpage. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Sometimes</span>, words within the explanations or examples have <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">hyperlinks</span> <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">that</span> lead to <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">their own</span> dictionary entries. It was <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">quite a revelation</span> when I <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">discovered</span> that many words <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">I thought I knew</span>, <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">perhaps even</span> learned in middle school, I <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">had been pronouncing</span> incorrectly <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">all along</span>! I began learning English in middle school, and before that, I didn't even know the <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">alphabet</span>. I lived in <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">an</span> ancient town, and my teachers were <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">mostly locals</span> who returned to our hometown after graduation to teach us. They weren't <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">particularly</span> skilled back then. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">In those old days</span>, <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">having</span> an English teacher at all was considered lucky. Since none of my classmates pronounced words correctly <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">either</span>, we <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">were unaware of</span> our mistakes. Later, in high school and college, our English teachers didn't <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">pay</span> much <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">attention to</span> individual pronunciation. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Consequently</span>, if we had a wrong pronunciation, we <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">rarely</span> had the chance to correct it. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Despite this</span>, I <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">managed to</span> pass the CET-4, even though I don't consider myself good at English. I just wonder if I had learned English the right way from the beginning, I might be much better now. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Looking</span> back, it's hard to believe how these things happened, especially since I left school fifteen years ago. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Fortunately</span>, I've continued to learn after school, so it's not too <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">difficult</span> to correct these <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">issues</span> now. I just wanted to <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">reflect on</span> this strong feeling I <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">experienced</span> today.



