
---

It's very dispoint when I look up a word has known and found that I pronouncing incorrect again and again. Even me, there are sometimes I can not hold. I'm very optimistic. When I marked IELTS as my goal, I didn't realize that I had a very low level. But, of cause, it's still my goal.
It's <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">quite</span> **disappointing** when I look up a word I thought I knew and <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">discover</span> I've been pronouncing it incorrectly again and again. Even <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">I</span>, <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">despite</span> my usual <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">optimism</span>, <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">sometimes find</span> it hard to **maintain my resolve**. When I set IELTS as my goal, I didn't realize <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">how truly low</span> my English level was. But, of course, it <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">remains</span> my goal.

Even there are too many words I pronouced incorrect, I can make it right after practice. So I think it's time to level up, I began to listen podcast to practice listening. I can catch up some content before, but after I correct some words I pronounced incorrect, I realized my ear is more sharp than before! The words became clear to me. Even I still can miss some content, it's a good process.
<span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Even though</span> there are too many words <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">I've</span> pronounced incorrectly, I can <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">certainly</span> **correct them with practice**. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Because of this,</span> I <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">believe</span> it's time to **level up** my skills, so I<span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">'ve started</span> <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">listening</span> to podcast<span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">s</span> to practice listening comprehension. I could <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">grasp</span> some content before, but after correcting some of my <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">mispronounced</span> words, I<span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">'ve noticed</span> my ear is **sharper than before!** The words <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">have become</span> <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">much</span> clearer to me. <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">Even if</span> I still miss some content, <span style="color:rgb(255, 0, 0)">it feels like</span> a really positive **process**.

